Add blog post on continuous delivery with buildkite (#68)
reside-ic/reside-ic.github.io: content/blog/buildkite-cd.md

---
author: "Rob Ashton"

> date: 2022-09-27

Reviewer: this will want updating before we publish

title: Continuous Delivery with Buildkite
tags:
 - Buildkite
 - CD
 - deployment
 - DevOps
---

# Introduction

> Our deployments at RESIDE typically consist of a python script using [constellation](https://github.com/reside-ic/constellation) to bring up a set of docker containers each of which contains a separate part of the application. We might have one docker image for the web app, one for the database, one for redis, one for an R backend API, and a worker image. We use [Buildkite](https://buildkite.com/) as part of our CI process to build these images and test them.

Reviewer: We also have a number of small bash scripts (mint and wodin are done this way)

Reviewer: generally, for packages link to the pkgdown site (mrc-ide.github.io/constellation), I think

Author: Does constellation have a site? mrc-ide.github.io/constellation 404s

Reviewer: Oh of course not, it's a python package...

> Our deployments at RESIDE typically consist of a python script using [constellation](https://github.com/reside-ic/constellation) to bring up a set of docker containers each of which contains a separate part of the application. We might have one docker image for the web app, one for the database, one for redis, one for an R backend API, and a worker image. We use [Buildkite](https://buildkite.com/) as part of our CI process to build these images and test them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our deployments at RESIDE typically consist of a python script using [constellation](https://github.com/reside-ic/constellation) to bring up a set of docker containers each of which contains a separate part of the application. We might have one docker image for the web app, one for the database, one for redis, one for an R backend API, and a worker image. We use [Buildkite](https://buildkite.com/) as part of our CI (continuous integration) process to build these images and test them.
```

> When we want to deploy a new feature to production our process typically involves:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we want to deploy a new feature to production our manual process typically involves:
```

1. ssh onto the staging server

> 1. Run deployment script

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Run the deployment script
```

1. Manually test the app for any issues
1. ssh onto the production server
1. Deploy to production
1. Manually test the app for any issues

> This creates barriers to deployments, there are tedious manual steps involved and if you do not deploy regularly it is not always obvious what server the app is running on, what script needs to be run, and how it is run. Additionally, we want to limit access to the machines to avoid accidental breakages. We have researchers on the team who don't work with the command line regularly and want to be able to deploy changes to their part of the code to see the effect it will have on the full app.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This creates barriers to deployments: there are tedious manual steps involved and if you do not deploy regularly it is not always obvious what server the app is running on, what script needs to be run, and how it is run. Additionally, we want to limit access to the machines to avoid accidental breakages. We have researchers on the team who don't work with the command line regularly and want to be able to deploy changes to their part of the code to see the effect it will have on the full app.
```

We wanted a way to
* Reduce the barrier to deployment making it easy and quick to encourage frequent integration and deployment

> * Deploy automatically to a staging server we can always review the state of the current master/main

Reviewer: "current master/main" here reads a bit weird - current copy of the merged code? It's not entirely obvious that this even refers to git and not some sort of master/slave type setup. Also not totally obvious that this is master/main across several repos

> * Deploy automatically to a staging server we can always review the state of the current master/main

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Deploy automatically to a staging server so we can always review the state of the current master/main
```

> * Allow science to redeploy and see their code changes without having to go through the development team

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Allow the science team to redeploy and see their code changes without having to go through the development team
```

> * Allow science to redeploy and see their code changes without having to go through the development team

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Allow researchers to redeploy and see their code changes without having to go through the development team
```

This blog post covers how we have used Buildkite within RESIDE to support continuous delivery of new features to staging environments. This does not cover details of the deployment script itself but how to set up Buildkite agents and configure a pipeline so that you can deploy via running a build, trigger it automatically and deploy specific tags of your docker images through environment variables.

# Setting up Buildkite agent

> We want to create a separate agent from our normal build agents so that a deployment does not have to wait on any long-running builds. Buildkite agents can be configured to listen to specific queues. The default queue is called `default`, jobs added without a specified queue go onto the `default` queue and Buildkite agents without a specified queue pull jobs from this queue. We can create an agent which listens to a different queue by setting the `queue` tag in the [agent configuration](https://buildkite.com/docs/agent/v3/configuration). For example set `tags="queue=deploy"` to pull jobs from the `deploy` queue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We want to create a separate agent from our normal build agents so that a deployment does not have to wait on any long-running builds. Buildkite agents can be configured to listen to specific queues. The default queue is called `default` - jobs added without a specified queue go onto the `default` queue and Buildkite agents without a specified queue pull jobs from this queue. We can create an agent which listens to a different queue by setting the `queue` tag in the [agent configuration](https://buildkite.com/docs/agent/v3/configuration). For example set `tags="queue=deploy"` to pull jobs from the `deploy` queue.
```

To run the script on the remote server the agent will need an ssh key pair. These need to be static and not change if the agent is torn down and brought up again. We have added a persistent ssh key pair into our [vault](https://www.vaultproject.io/) secret store. Then when the agent is brought up we read the secret out of the vault and write it into the ssh dir.

```
AGENT_SSH=~buildkite-agent/.ssh
mkdir -p $AGENT_SSH
vault read -field=public secret/deploy/ssh > $AGENT_SSH/id_deploy.pub
vault read -field=private secret/deploy/ssh > $AGENT_SSH/id_deploy
chmod 600 $AGENT_SSH/id_deploy
chown -R buildkite-agent.buildkite-agent $AGENT_SSH
```

We then add the public key to the list of authorised keys on the app host server.

We can now start the agent. In the agents list on Buildkite, you should see the agent running with the queue set to `deploy`. We now have an agent listening on a dedicated deploy queue that can run scripts on the app host server. Next, we need to set up the deployment pipelines themselves.

> <img src="/img/buildkite-cd-agent.png" alt="png of agent list"/>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`<img src="/img/buildkite-cd-agent.png" alt="png of agent list"/>`
```

# Deployment pipeline

> Create a repository for your deployment pipelines and add a pipeline yml at `./buildkite/deploy-pipeline.yml` with content

Reviewer 2: Minor point, but the mode here seems to have changed from what "we" do, to instructions which "you" should follow. Should probably be consistent.

```
steps:
  - label: ":rocket: deploy"
    command: >-
      ssh -i ~/.ssh/id_deploy -oStrictHostKeyChecking=accept-new <username>@<host> './deploy.sh'
    agents:
      queue: "deploy"
```

The important parts here are
* The `ssh` command sets the key to use via `-i ~/.ssh/id_deploy`
* `StrictHostKeyChecking` is set to `accept-new`, this will accept the host key the first time but refuse to connect if the saved key does not match. This will suffice for us because our agents and host server are on a private internal network so we can trust accepting an unknown key the first time we login to the remote server.
* `<username>@<host>` should be the username and host of your remote server where the app will be deployed
* `./deploy.sh` is the name of the deployment script on your remote server

> Now we need to add the pipeline to Buildkite. This requires a couple of steps different than adding a new CI build because we want finer control over when this pipeline is triggered.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now we need to add the pipeline to Buildkite. This requires a couple of different steps to adding a new CI build because we want finer control over when this pipeline is triggered.
```

Reviewer 3: Not sure if my suggestion is much better tbh

Reviewer 2: How about "This is a little different to adding a new CI build because.."

1. Login to Buildkite and click the "+" icon to add a new pipeline
1. Set the "Git Repository URL" to the repo containing your deployment pipeline
1. Set the steps to "Read steps from repository" and update the "Commands to run" to use the name of your deployment pipeline `buildkite-agent pipeline upload ./buildkite/deploy-pipeline.yml`
1. Set the "Agent Targeting Rules" to `queue=deploy` you should see that this queue matches one of the connected agents

>    <img src="/img/buildkite-cd-pipeline.png" alt="png of pipeline setup"/>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   `<img src="/img/buildkite-cd-pipeline.png" alt="png of pipeline setup"/>`
```

```
  - wait

  # This makes sure that deploys are triggered in the same order as the
  # test builds, no matter which test builds finish first.
  # see https://buildkite.com/docs/pipelines/controlling-concurrency
  - label: "Concurrency gate"
    command: "exit 0"
    if: build.branch == 'main'
    concurrency: 1
    concurrency_group: "app-concurrency-gate"

  - wait

  - label: ":rocket:"
    trigger: "deploy"
    if: build.branch == 'main'
```

Buildkite can support more complex [triggers](https://buildkite.com/docs/pipelines/trigger-step) and [scheduled builds](https://buildkite.com/docs/pipelines/scheduled-builds). For our use case, we have a pipeline that deploys to a staging instance which is triggered automatically whenever there is a change to any of the services which form the app.

# Controlling deployment

> What we also want to do is be able to deploy a specific branch of one of our services so we can see the effect of big changes before merging into main. Buildkite gives us a way to do this through [environent variables](https://buildkite.com/docs/pipelines/environment-variables#defining-your-own). Each service that forms part of the app has a CI pipeline that builds a docker image. These are tagged with the branch name and the sha. We can use environment variables to set the tag of the docker image we want to deploy. There are multiple ways to set environment variables but in this example we set them through the pipeline yml. Update your deployment pipeline to look like

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We would also like to have the option to deploy a specific branch of one of our services so we can see the effect of big changes before merging into main. Buildkite gives us a way to do this through [environent variables](https://buildkite.com/docs/pipelines/environment-variables#defining-your-own). Each service that forms part of the app has a CI pipeline that builds a docker image. These are tagged with the branch name and the sha. We can use environment variables to set the tag of the docker image we want to deploy. There are multiple ways to set environment variables but in this example we set them through the pipeline yml. Update your deployment pipeline to look like
```

> What we also want to do is be able to deploy a specific branch of one of our services so we can see the effect of big changes before merging into main. Buildkite gives us a way to do this through [environent variables](https://buildkite.com/docs/pipelines/environment-variables#defining-your-own). Each service that forms part of the app has a CI pipeline that builds a docker image. These are tagged with the branch name and the sha. We can use environment variables to set the tag of the docker image we want to deploy. There are multiple ways to set environment variables but in this example we set them through the pipeline yml. Update your deployment pipeline to look like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What we also want to do is be able to deploy a specific branch of one of our services so we can see the effect of big changes before merging into main. Buildkite gives us a way to do this through [environment variables](https://buildkite.com/docs/pipelines/environment-variables#defining-your-own). Each service that forms part of the app has a CI pipeline that builds a docker image. These are tagged with the branch name and the sha. We can use environment variables to set the tag of the docker image we want to deploy. There are multiple ways to set environment variables but in this example we set them through the pipeline yml. Update your deployment pipeline to look like
```

```
env:
  TAG: "${TAG:-main}"

steps:
  - label: ":rocket: deploy"
    command: >-
      ssh -i ~/.ssh/id_deploy -oStrictHostKeyChecking=accept-new <username>@<host> './deploy.sh --tag=$TAG'
    agents:
      queue: "deploy"
```

This will define an env var `TAG` with default value `main` which will then be passed into your command step. You will have to update your deployment script to take a `--tag` argument to bring up the docker container with that specific tag.

When you run a build via the Buildkite UI you can then set the environment variable in the new build dialog.

> <img src="/img/buildkite-cd-run.png" alt="png of pipeline run"/>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`<img src="/img/buildkite-cd-run.png" alt="png of pipeline run"/>`
```

# Next steps

> We wanted to set up Buildkite deployment pipelines to both simplify deployments and automate repeated manual work. We now have pipelines that will allow us to deploy manually, deploy automatically, and deploy a specified tag of a docker image. When we deploy to the staging instance we still have to manually check the newly deployed version works. This is slow and prone to missing regressions. When we deploy a new feature we manually check it, but we don't necessarily check all other parts of the app. Bugs can be introduced which we only know about when users report issues or we notice errors in the logs. We could take the automation a step further by writing browser tests that run after the deployment.

Reviewer: This paragraph sort of just trails off and you might turn it into something more positive and active - say we are planning on automatically running browser tests against the deployed instances, but then say something good about what the system in its current state helps us (you already have this information in the introduction but the reader has forgotten it by now)
